---
layout: post
title: AWS Essentials for Data Science - 1. Why Cloud Computing?
title-clean: AWS Essentials for Data Science<div class="a2">1. Why Cloud Computing?</div>
author: matt_sosna
---

Imagine that you're the lead coordinator for data science meet & greets in New York. (Also imagine that we've sufficiently moved on from Covid that meet & greets are a thing!) A major part of your planning involves reserving a _venue_ to accommodate your guests. You've always rented venues around the city to host the party, but you're wondering if it makes more sense to just buy a floor in a building somewhere so you can avoid the hassle.

If the venue is an analogy for a computer, then the cloud computing industry would answer a resounding "No!" for purchasing your own venue. It is far cheaper, safer, and more scalable to _rent_ computers in a data center than to own, the cloud computing argument goes. **"Let us reserve a venue for you," they'd say. "In fact, forget about venues altogether, and just focus on throwing a great party."**

But why is this the case?

Cloud services as an industry


AWS is market leader, so we'll focus on them. But all of these services are available from the other major players in the cloud market, Google Cloud Platform and Microsoft Azure. This post will therefore cover more of the concepts than stuff specific to AWS.

---
**AWS Essentials for Data Science:**
1. **Why cloud computing?**
2. Storage
3. Compute

---

## Table of contents
* What is the cloud?
* Setting up


## What is the cloud?
Data science requires computers. The stronger your computer, the more computations you can run per second, the larger the datasets you can manipulate at once, and the more data you can store on your machine. This is the case for any programming work (e.g. even just having an app).

But the laptop or desktop you're using right now probably isn't optimized for running calculations all day $-$ it's optimized for providing a good consumer experience. Some resources are dedicated to the graphical interface displayed on your monitor; malware detection is running in the background; weather and news apps are pinging external APIs every few minutes to stay up-to-date.

Cloud computing is an important aspect of data science work. Basically, don't be limited by the power of your computer; use powerful servers in the cloud. These servers can store your data, process things, etc.

Scalable. You're an online retailer getting ready for Black Friday. Your website is going to get a lot more traffic... so much so that the server will have trouble fulfilling HTTP requests (such as sending the HTML for the homepage when a user lands on the site, or updating the database with the availability of each item as orders are placed). It's normally pretty fast, but as the number of users increases on your site, there'll start to be a backlog of requests, causing the website to be slow. Similarly, it can take a while for an item to be marked as out of stock... hopefully before another person adds it to their cart and orders it too!

https://queue-it.com/blog/how-high-online-traffic-can-crash-your-website/



You'd normally have to buy a bunch of servers to handle the surge in traffic your website will get.




## Setting up
Let's create an AWS account. These posts will make more sense if you can follow along, and you'll be able to then experiment on your own later.

We start by going the [AWS website](https://aws.amazon.com) and clicking "Create an AWS Account."
